# Model card for World Value Survey metric Wordalisation



The WVS chatbot is implemented within the [TwelveGPT Education framework](https://github.com/soccermatics/twelve-gpt-educational) and
is intended as an illustration of the methods. It is thus intended as an example to help others building wordalisations. The wordalisations are constructed using various social metrics derived from data collected in the [World Value Survey](www.worldvaluessurvey.org) (WVS). These social metrics as well as the WVS are discussed in the [Datasets] section. This work is a derivative of the full [Twelve GPT product](https://twelve.football). The original design and code for this project was by Matthias Green, David Sumpter and Ágúst Pálmason Morthens, with modification made by Beimnet Girma and Amy Rouillard to adapt it to the WVS use-case.

This model card is based on the [model cards paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.03993) and is adapted specifically to Wordalisation applications as detailed in [Representing data in words](publication here). We also provide this model card as an example of 
good practice for describing wordalisations.

Jump to section:

- [Intended use](#intended-use)
- [Factors](#factors)
- [Datasets](#dataset)
- [Model](#model)
- [Evaluation](#evaluation)
- [Ethical considerations](#ethical-considerations)
- [Caveats and recommendations](#caveats-and-recommendations)

## Intended use

The *primary use case* of this wordalisation is eductional. It shows how to convert a dataframe of statistics about a countries into a text about a chosen country. This version cannot be used for insight generation purposes, i.e. data analysis, firstly because we do not guarantee the quality of the data and because the functionality is limited. Data analysis is thus *out of scope*. Use of the chat for queries not relating to the data at hand is also *out of scope*. 

## Factors

The Football Scout Wordalisation is applied to a very specific demographic group, namely male professional football players. This version is only for use within that group and thus excludes female atheletes. The ethnicity and social background of the players is not documented, but can be (anecdotely) considered to be more diverse than that of the English population as a whole (the Premier League is played in England). Players come from all over the world to play in the Premier League. The dataset was chosen because of avialability of a public dataset and because of the fact that the players will be recognisable names for many users. 

## Datasets

The dataframe used in this project was constructed from a dataset ... 
A *preprocessing* step, largely based on ...

## Model

### Quantitative model

The model applies a ranking on the football players in the dataset based on the z-scores. For each metric a z-scoure is calculated by 
subtracting the mean and dividing by the standard deviation over all players in the dataset. The players are then displayed in a distribution
plot with the selected player highlighted. 

### Normative model

The model applies a ranking on the football players in the dataset based on the z-scores. So players further to the left are described as worse on the metric and those to the right are described as better. These are socially agreed upon (in football and sporting situations) ways of viewing players, but nevertheless applies a norm whereby players who have higher values of these metrics are ranked more highly. 

The prompt to *tell it who it is* identifies a human role for the wordalisation as a "UK based scout". The user-assistant pairs in the stage of *tell it what it knows* describe how the data metrics can be [interpretted in footballing terms](https://github.com/soccermatics/twelve-gpt-educational/blob/main/data/describe/Forward.xlsx). These descriptions outline the meaning of the metrics.

In the text which is generated at the stage of *tell it what data to use* we use the following function to translate z-scores to evaluation words:
```python
def describe_level(value):
    thresholds = [1.5, 1, 0.5, -0.5, -1]
    words = ["outstanding", "excellent", "good", "average", "below average", "poor"]
    return describe(thresholds, words, value)
```
There are three positive terms and two negative terms in the words used, with no negative equivalent of "outstanding" defined. 

In the *tell it how to answer* step, two examples were created, based on data from Pedro and Giroud. This somewhat compromises how the texts for these two players are constructed. These examples and the prompt used emphasise highlighting positive and negative aspects of the players' performance, and ignoring aspects which are average or typical.

### Language model

The wordalisation supports both GPT4o and ChatGPT and related APIs, as well as Gemini API. Since these language model's training data includes articles written about the players described here, this knowledge will seem into both the answers generated by the wordalisation and the chat. Some aspects of the answers will come from data external to that in the provided dataframe.

## Evaluation

No systematic *quantitative analyses* have been carried out on this wordalisation. Ideally, this wordalisation should be subjected to a rigorous *qualitative test* of:
- Reliability of information. Are there factual errors in the text?
- Biases. Does the wordalisation use social or ethnic features of the players to create the texts?

## Ethical considerations

Severel ethical challenges have arisen in this project. As noted above, there in a gender disparity in the data used. Several datasets for women's football are available and could be easily adapted to the framework here. There is also the issue of the effect such applications can have on the people who this data is about. This application deals with data collected on football players and uses it to assess their performance. Players' performances in the Premier League are regularly scrutinised in the media and on social media platforms. Informal discussions by the wordalisations creators with professional football scouts have suggested that the resulting texts can be "too positive" for professional settings, where clubs have to make important financial decisions based on performance. Nevertheless, this does not take away from the fact that the players analysed here are living human beings, whose performance is being evaluated in words by an automated system that does not understand broader factors around their lives. Careful consideration should be made if applying these methods to data collected on atheletes in environments where this type of scruitiny isn't the norm.

## Caveats and recommendations

We have no further caveats and recommendations.

